===============================================
WINDOWS EUDORA 7.1 INSTALLER BUILD INSTRUCTIONS
===============================================


Perform the following steps to produce a Windows Eudora 7.1 installer:


1.  Install the InstallShield DevStudio 9.0 package, which can be found in the
Eudora Perforce depot, which is at ihperforce.qualcomm.com:1667.  The file is
//cots/InstallShield/InstallShieldCD.zip.
The license key for it is: NYAADD-0900-A010260720.

2.  Upgrade InstallShield to Service Pack 1 by running the installer for it at
//cots/InstallShield/InstallShieldDevStudio9sp1.exe.
Alternatively you can get SP1 inside of InstallShield DevStudio by going to the
Tools menu and selecting Check for Updates.  Mark the checkbox next to the SP1
update, and then click on the Install button.

3.  Get the Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2003 distribution versions of the
following merge modules:

    VC_User_CRT71_RTL_X86_---.msm   (version 7.10.3052.4)
    VC_User_MFC71_RTL_X86_---.msm   (version 7.10.3077.0)
    VC_User_STL71_RTL_X86_---.msm   (version 7.10.3077.0)

These can be found in //cots/InstallShield.

Copy those files in to C:\Program Files\Merge Modules, but first make backups
of the existing merge modules in that directory with the same filenames.

4.  Get the sources for the installer.  These can be found in the Eudora Perforce
depot, which is at ihperforce.qualcomm.com:1667.  Sync to
//depot/main/InstallersForEudora/Eudora/, and you must put the local files in
C:\Eudora_Installers\Eudora for the builds to work correctly.

5.  Open up the Eudora installer project inside of InstallShield DevStudio by
going to File->Open and selecting the file
C:\Eudora_Installers\Eudora\EudoraProject.ism.

6.  Verify that you have the correct versions of the MFC/C/C++ 7.1 runtime
merge modules by going to the Objects view in the tree on the left under
Application Data.  In the Features pane, open up the tree to
Eudora/Shared_DLLs/New Merge Module Holder Object 1/.  There should be three
objects underneath that which correspond to the three merge modules you copied
up in step #3.  Click on each object and make sure that the version numbers
listed in the Description pane on the right correspond to the versions listed
up in step #3.

7.  Build the installer by selecting the Build menu, and then
Build Eudora_Electronic_Release (or just hit F7).  You will see the build
progressing in the Build output pane in the bottom of the DevStudio window.
During the build you will get prompted for the password for signing the
installer.  Don't enter a password (just hit Enter) as the installer will
actually get signed in the next step.  If the build works correctly you should
get no errors and 7 warnings. The produced installer will be found in
C:\Eudora_Installers\Eudora\EudoraProject\Media\Eudora_Electronic_Release\Package\
with a file name of Eudora_7.1.0.9.exe.

8.  Sign the installer with the following command:

//ziplock/qiswarehouse-candidates/SCM/release_automation/signtool/signtool.exe sign /f //ziplock/qiswarehouse-candidates/SCM/release_automation/signtool/mycredentials.pfx /p 1loveUIONE /d "Windows Eudora 7.1" /du http://www.eudora.com /v Eudora_7.1.0.9.exe

This assumes you are in the directory containing the built installer, but you
can specify a full path to the installer if you want to run this from another
directory.

9.  Test the new installer by installing Eudora using the original installer,
and then using your newly built installer in to a different directory.  Use a
diff utility to ensure that all of the files in the both installations are
identical, e.g. "diff -r OriginalInstallDir NewInstallDir".

10. Make the changes you need to make to the installer, and rebuild using steps
#7 and #8.

11. Diff the original vs. this new installer, like you did in step #9, and make
sure the only diffs are the changes you made in step #10.

